REP 151 Python 3 rewrite (#201)
ros-infrastructure/rep: rep-0151.rst

REP: 151
Title: Python 3 Support

> Author: Dirk Thomas

Reviewer: Feel free to add yourself to the author list.

Author: Added in 43bd658

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst

> Created: 23-Dec-2017

Reviewer: Also add the current date here.

Author: Today's date in 43bd658

Outline
=======

#. Abstract_
#. Motivation_
#. Context_
#. Proposal_
#. References_
#. Copyright_

Abstract
========

This REP describes the path for switching from Python 2 to Python 3 in ROS 1.

Motivation
==========

As described in the Python release schedule [1]_ Python 2.7 will only receive
bugfix releases until 2020.
As a consequence Ubuntu is trying to demote Python 2.7 into the `universe`
repository [2]_.

> While it is unlikely that Python 2.7 will be removed from the archives entirely

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While it is unlikely that Python 2.7 will be removed from the archives entirely,
```

it should not be relied on past its EOL date.
Therefore ROS 1 must move to Python 3.

Context
=======

> Different versions of Python can't be mixed within a single ROS distribution.

Reviewer 3: Can we please remove this sentence?  It runs counter an extremely broad body of evidence that single codebases can support both Python 2 and Python 3.

Reviewer: That is not what the sentence tries to express.

You can't install a package `foo` with Python 2 and a package `bar` with Python 3 and expect that either of them will be able to find the modules of the other package.

Reviewer 3: "_Python 2 and Python 3 maintain separate _site-package_ directories so packages installed with pip2 can not be found with Python 3 and vice versa._"

Reviewer: Exactly, see the other comment why that is a problem: https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/201#discussion_r311735555

Author: I deleted this paragraph in d48612e6414428242ae4cb2847247343ad9b48ee

A package using Python 3 can't import Python modules from a package built using

> Python 2.

Reviewer 3: Packages built to support both Py2 and Py3 can import Python modules that have also been written to support both.  This is also a broadly proven fact even for numerous codebases that are more complex than ROS.

Reviewer: If a package `foo` is installed with Python 2 its dependencies will use Python 2 packages which in the system are installed into a directory like `python2.7`. Another package `bar` installed with Python 3 would fail to use since dependencies of `foo` wouldn't necessarily be available for Python 3. Therefore we can't mix Python major versions within the same distro.

Reviewer 3: You can but you would need to:
* __python2 -m pip install -r requirements.txt__
* __python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt__

Doing so is such a common practice that saying it can not be done seems strange.

Reviewer: You can absolutely do that when installing the package twice with `pip`. But that is not how a ROS distribution is built. Each ROS package is build into a Debian package. And in that process where we previously defaulted to Python 2 the upcoming ROS distro will default to Python 3.

Reviewer 3: “_ROS Distributions are built by putting each dependency into a Debian package which prevents the simultaneous support of both Python 2 and Python 3._”

Reviewer 4: We're currently doing our migration using the dual-python strategy proposed in #154. There have definitely been some sharp corners, particularly around feeding each interpreter the proper PYTHONPATH and ensuring correct shebangs in the installspace, but overall it has worked really well.

As in the proposal, we dual-build (via a catkin_tools plugin) any package containing a `setup.py` and ensure all system dependencies are available for both pythons, then migrate individual processes and scripts once they're ready and tested by changing their shebangs. This has allowed us to stage our migration over several months and avoid having to bring up our entire system again from scratch as Python 3.

So yes, not supporting dual-python workspaces upstream is a consequence of ROS packaging choices and ideology, not an inherent limitation in Python or anything else upstream.

Reviewer 3: Sounds like you are on the right path.

Author: I deleted this paragraph in d48612e6414428242ae4cb2847247343ad9b48ee .

The Debian package context doesn't seem to help explain the rest of the document. Maybe a ROS distro could have targeted multiple Python versions by releasing Debian packages with a name prefix or suffix like upstream's `python-` or `python3-`, or maybe a ROS distro could have targeted multiple Python versions by installing duplicate dependencies for Python 2 and Python 3, but that's not what was chosen. Instead the context section starts with the link to the discourse post saying ROS Noetic will target Python 3 only.

All ROS packages containing Python code need to support Python 3 before they can
be released into Noetic.

Past proposals for Python 3 support have assumed a ROS distro will need to
support Python 2 and Python 3 at the same time.
Since then it was decided the first ROS 1 distribution to support Python 3
will be Noetic Ninjemys (May 2020) [3]_, and it will only support Python 3.
This REP only describes the current proposal since the change in requirements
has made past proposals obsolete.

This proposal does not specify a minimum minor version for Python.

> The minimum version will be defined in REP 3 [4]_ together with all other

Reviewer 3: Broken link.

> The minimum version will being defined in REP 3 [4]_ together with all other

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The minimum version will be defined in REP 3 [4]_ together with all other
```

versions.

Proposal
========

Python 3 support at the time of Noetic release means:

* All ROS tooling supports creating a Python 3 only ROS distro
* All ROS packages released to Noetic support Python 3

The amount of work to transition to Python 3 is expected to be significant.
The entire ROS community will need to share the workload.
This effort should be started as soon as possible to reduce the risk of the
Noetic release being delayed.

Tooling support for Python 3
----------------------------

rosdep keys
'''''''''''

> All exsiting Python rosdep keys including ``<platform>_python3`` entries will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All existing Python rosdep keys including ``<platform>_python3`` entries will
```

stay the same to avoid breaking unknown existing use cases.

> Even if an key refers to a Python 2 package on one platform and Python 3 on

Reviewer 2: Even if **_a_** key...

another, it should stay that way.

Some Python rosdep keys have ``<platform>_python3`` entries.
This was an experiment at having a rosdep key conditionally evaluate to either
a Python 2 or Python 3 system dependency.
No new ``<platform>_python3`` entries should be added, and the entries should
not be relied on.

For new Python keys, when a platform has separate Python 2 and Python 3 versions

> of a package there should be a rosdep key for each.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of a package, there should be a rosdep key for each.
```

> For example, there are two keys ``python-catkin-pkg`` and ``python3-catkin-pkg``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, consider the two keys ``python-catkin-pkg`` and ``python3-catkin-pkg``.
```

The ``python-catkin-pkg`` key should resolve to a Python 2 dependency on any
platform where one exists, while ``python3-catkin-pkg`` should only resolve to a
Python 3 dependency.

ROS_PYTHON_VERSION
''''''''''''''''''

``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` is an environment variable that is set to either ``2`` or
``3`` to indicate the major version of Python supported by a ROS distro.
The intent is to allow ``package.xml`` files to have conditional Python
dependencies.

It is set by the package ``ros_environment`` when sourcing a ROS workspace.
The version set will be dictated by REP 3 [4]_.

> For example, in Melodic it defaults to ``2``, but in Noetic this must be ``3``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, in Melodic it defaults to ``2``, but in Noetic it must be ``3``.
```

Users building ROS from source will not have an existing ROS workspace set, so

> the variable won't be set and conditional dependencies can't be evalulated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the variable won't be set, and conditional dependencies can't be evaluated
```

> when using ``rosdep`` to instal them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when using ``rosdep`` to install them.
```

To fix this, ``rosdep`` should set ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` to the same version of
Python used to invoke it.
It will get this information using ``sys.version[0]``.

> A user wanting to use a different Python version must set ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to use a different Python version, ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` must be set
```

explicitly.

rosdep and pip packages
'''''''''''''''''''''''

> Unlike debian packages, keys that resolve to packages on PyPI may refer to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike Debian packages, keys that resolve to packages on PyPI may refer to
```
As far as I can seen, just by looking around online, Debian is always capitalized. Ignore if you know otherwise.

either Python 2 or Python 3 dependencies.
The version that gets downloaded depends on the version of Python used to
invoke pip.
Rosdep currently calls the command ``pip``.

> It might use Python 2 when using the debian package ``python-pip``, but it could

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It might use Python 2 when using the Debian package ``python-pip``, but it could
```

use Python 3 inside a venv.

``rosdep`` could default to ``sys.executable -m pip`` to use the same version of
Python as rosdep, but a user building the ROS 1 bridge for Melodic is likely

> using the debian package ``python3-rosdep``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using the Debian package ``python3-rosdep``.
```

To support this, rosdep should use ``python$ROS_PYTHON_VERSION -m pip``.
Since ``rosdep`` sets ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` for itself if unset, this will default

> to the same version of Python as rosdep if ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` is unset, but

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to the same version of Python as rosdep if ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` is unset. However,
```

Author: This + rewrote sentence in 3262e4b

it can still be overridden automatically when a ROS workspace is sourced.

ROS packages support for Python 3
---------------------------------

There are many ROS packages using Python that will need to be modified to
support Python 3.
Packages using different branches for different ROS distros can drop support
for Python 2 in their Noetic branch.
Packages which use the same branch in multiple ROS distros may need to support
both Python 2 and Python 3 at the same time.
This section describes what needs to be done in both cases.

Shebangs and reliance on the Python command
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> Python scripts on unix systemx typically have shebang lines written as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python scripts on UNIX systems typically have shebang lines written as:
```

.. code-block: bash

    #!/usr/bin/env python

PEP 394 recommends distributed Python scripts to use either ``python2`` or
``python3`` [7]_.

> The ``python`` command cannot be trusted to a spefic Python version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``python`` command cannot be trusted to a specific Python version.
```

On older ROS distros, scripts can continue to use ``python`` since they're known
to work on those platforms.
In preparation for Noetic, these shebang's should be rewritten to the specific
version of Python supported, ``python3``.

Packages using the same branch will need to conditionally rewrite the shebangs.
Packages can use the CMake macro ``catkin_install_python()`` to install Python
scripts with rewritten shebangs.

The same issue appears in scripts that call the ``python`` command directly.
If they are Python scripts, they should be modified to invoke ``sys.executable``.
Otherwise, they should be edited to invoke the specific version of Python they
require, or ``python$ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` if the script works with both.

Dependencies and package.xml
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

On platforms where the target version of Python is 2, the package.xml of a ROS
package must refer to Python 2 dependencies, and when the target Python
version is 3 it must refer to Python 3 dependencies.
Packages which release from different branches for each ROS distro can replace

> rosdep keys that resolve to Python 2 dependencies to ones that resolve to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rosdep keys that resolve to Python 2 dependencies with ones that resolve to
```

Python 3 equivalents.
Packages using the same code base for multiple ROS distros should instead use
conditional dependencies as described in REP 149 [5]_.

.. code-block: xml

    <depend condition="$ROS_PYTHON_VERSION == '2'">python-numpy</depend>
    <depend condition="$ROS_PYTHON_VERSION == '3'">python3-numpy</depend>

If ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` is relied upon at build time, such as when using
``catkin_install_python()`` to rewrite shebangs, then the package must declare a
``<buildtool_depend>`` on ``ros_environment``.
Any ROS package which uses ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` in a script intended to be
run at runtime should add an ``<exec_depend>`` tag for ``ros_environment``.

Making Python fixes available to downstream packages
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Transitioning to Python 3 is expected to be a significant effort.

> Typicically ROS packages are tested using the ROS build farm; however, that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Typically, ROS packages are tested using the ROS build farm; however, that
```

will not be available until packages for the targeted Ubuntu distribution
become available.

> Instead, a placehoder ``Noetic`` ``distribution.yaml`` will be made available in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead, a placeholder ``Noetic`` ``distribution.yaml`` will be made available in
```

advance of the buildfarm availability.
Maintainers should add ``source`` entries for their Noetic branches to this file
to enable downstream users to use ``rosinstall_generator`` with the
``--upstream-development`` flag to get Python 3 fixes.
Instructions to build from source using Python 3 will be made available to
the ROS community.

> Once the build farm is available, Maintainers should release packages with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the build farm is available, maintainers should release packages with
```

Python 3 fixes to Noetic as soon as possible, even if they intend to make
breaking changes later.

> Organizing Community effort

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Organizing community effort
```
Is community usually capitalized in this context? Other subtitles aren't title case here so this is either a typo or special case

Author: Do you think these titles should be capitalized? I wasn't sure. I'll commit the change as a typo for now.

Reviewer 2: The vast majority of docs across OR don't capitalize titles (they use sentence case). So I say stick with the trend. As long as it's consistent within this document.

Packages using the same branch will need to conditionally rewrite the shebangs.
Packages can use the CMake macro `catkin_install_Python()` to install Python
scripts with rewritten shebangs.

The same issue appears in scripts that call the `Python` command directly.
If they are Python scripts, they should be modified to invoke `sys.executable`.
Otherwise, they should be edited to invoke the specific version of Python they
require, or `Python$ROS_PYTHON_VERSION` if the script works with both.

Dependencies and package.xml
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

On platforms where the target version of Python is 2, the package.xml of a ROS
package must refer to Python 2 dependencies, and when the target Python
version is 3 it must refer to Python 3 dependencies.
Packages which release from different branches for each ROS distro can replace
rosdep keys that resolve to Python 2 dependencies to ones that resolve to
Python 3 equivalents.
Packages using the same code base for multiple ROS distros should instead use
conditional dependencies as described in REP 149 [5]_.

.. code-block: xml

    <depend condition="$ROS_PYTHON_VERSION == '2'">Python-numpy</depend>

>     <depend condition="$ROS_PYTHON_VERSION == '3'">Python3-numpy</depend>

Reviewer: The rosdep keys are lower case.

Author: Oops, I was a bit careless in using `%s/python/Python/g`. Fixed in 1c200a7

REP: 151
Title: Python 3 Support
Author: Dirk Thomas, Shane Loretz

> Status: Draft

Reviewer: Propably "Final"?

Author: 'Final' in e6512459764898eca8ea2c9e96f30bed1861765b

This makes sure ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` dependencies get evaluated in a way that
matches the desired distro.
This case should not happen so long as the user has sourced a workspace with the
``ros_environment`` package, since that package sets both ``ROS_DISTRO`` and
``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``.

Finally, if none of ``--rosdistro``, ``ROS_DISTRO`` or ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` are set
then for the purpose of evaluating conditional dependencies ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``
will be set to ``sys.version[0]``.
This makes sure ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` dependencies are not silently ignored,
though there is a risk of installing the wrong packages.

rosdep and pip packages
'''''''''''''''''''''''
Unlike Debian packages, keys that resolve to packages on PyPI may refer to
either Python 2 or Python 3 dependencies.
The version that gets downloaded depends on the version of Python used to
invoke pip.
Rosdep currently calls the command ``pip``.
It might use Python 2 when using the Debian package ``python-pip``, but it could
use Python 3 inside a venv.
``rosdep`` should pick a version of pip that matches ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``
regardless of wheter a Python virtual env is being used.

> First ``rosdep`` should try the commands ``pip2`` or ``pip3`` since those are

Reviewer: Has this been implemented? If yes, rephrasing the sentence would be good as well as adding a reference.

Author: Yes, ros-infrastructure/rosdep#709 , changed tense in 55a6e23bd43d88219c14a6bb8a009d50c54d879d

    <depend condition="$ROS_PYTHON_VERSION == '3'">python3-numpy</depend>

If ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` is relied upon at build time, such as when using
``catkin_install_python()`` to rewrite shebangs, then the package must declare a
``<buildtool_depend>`` on ``ros_environment``.
Any ROS package which uses ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` in a script intended to be
run at runtime should add an ``<exec_depend>`` tag for ``ros_environment``.

Making Python fixes available to downstream packages
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Transitioning to Python 3 is expected to be a significant effort.
Typically, ROS packages are tested using the ROS build farm; however, that
will not be available until packages for the targeted Ubuntu distribution
become available.
Instead, a placeholder ``Noetic`` ``distribution.yaml`` will be made available in
advance of the buildfarm availability.
Maintainers should add ``source`` entries for their Noetic branches to this file
to enable downstream users to use ``rosinstall_generator`` with the
``--upstream-development`` flag to get Python 3 fixes.
Instructions to build from source using Python 3 will be made available to

> the ROS community.

Reviewer: Most of this paragraph seems obsolete now.

Author: Rewrote this and section below in 9c3048db45149849c8b95ab012c197aa2db7cd8d

The ``python-catkin-pkg`` key should resolve to a Python 2 dependency on any
platform where one exists, while ``python3-catkin-pkg`` should only resolve to a
Python 3 dependency.

ROS_PYTHON_VERSION
''''''''''''''''''

``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` is an environment variable that is set to either ``2`` or
``3`` to indicate the major version of Python supported by a ROS distro.
The intent is to allow ``package.xml`` files to have conditional Python
dependencies.

It is set by the package ``ros_environment`` when sourcing a ROS workspace.
The version set will be dictated by REP 3 [4]_.
For example, in Melodic it defaults to ``2``, but in Noetic it must be ``3``.

Users building ROS from source will not have an existing ROS workspace set, so
the variable won't be set, and conditional dependencies can't be evaluated
when using ``rosdep`` to install them.
To fix this, ``rosdep`` will set ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``.
It must choose a Python version to match the ROS distro while allowing platforms
that already use Python 3 to override it

The choice is made using the following information:

 * the command line option ``--rosdistro``
 * the environment vairable ``ROS_DISTRO``

>  * the environment vairable ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * the environment variable ``ROS_DISTRO``
 * the environment variable ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``
```

will be set to the value of ``python_version``.
This makes sure ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` dependencies get evaluated in a way that
matches the desired distro.
This case should not happen so long as the user has sourced a workspace with the
``ros_environment`` package, since that package sets both ``ROS_DISTRO`` and
``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``.

Finally, if none of ``--rosdistro``, ``ROS_DISTRO`` or ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` are set
then for the purpose of evaluating conditional dependencies ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``
will be set to ``sys.version[0]``.
This makes sure ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION`` dependencies are not silently ignored,
though there is a risk of installing the wrong packages.

rosdep and pip packages
'''''''''''''''''''''''
Unlike Debian packages, keys that resolve to packages on PyPI may refer to
either Python 2 or Python 3 dependencies.
The version that gets downloaded depends on the version of Python used to
invoke pip.
Rosdep currently calls the command ``pip``.
It might use Python 2 when using the Debian package ``python-pip``, but it could
use Python 3 inside a venv.
``rosdep`` should pick a version of pip that matches ``ROS_PYTHON_VERSION``

> regardless of wheter a Python virtual env is being used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
regardless of whether a Python virtual env is being used.
```
